Tranio,
since for the great desireI had
to see fair Padua, nurseryof arts,
I am arrived for fruitfulLombardy, the pleasantgarden of great Italy;
and by my father's loveand leave am arm'd
with his good will and thygood company,
my trusty servant,well-approved in all,
here let us breathe andhaply institute
a course of learning andingenious studies.
Pisa renown'd for gravecitizens
gave me my being and myfather first,
a merchant of greattraffic through the world,
Vincetino come ofBentivolii.
Vincetino's son brought upin Florence,
it shall become to serveall hopes conceived,
to deck his fortune withhis virtuous deeds.
And therefore, Tranio, forthe time I study,
virtue and that part ofphilosophy
will I apply that treatsof happiness by virtuespecially to be achieved.
Well, tell me thy mind,
for I have Pisa left andam to Padua come
as he that leaves ashallow plash to plungehim in the deep
and with satiety seeks toquench his thirst.
Mi perdonato, gentlemaster mine,
I am in all affected asyourself,
glad that you thus resolve
to suck the sweets ofsweet philosophy.
Only, good master, whilewe do admire
this virtue and this moraldiscipline,
let's be no stoics nor nostocks, I pray,
or so devote toAristotle's cheques
as Ovid be an outcastquite abjured.
Balk logic withacquaintance that you have
and practise rhetoric inyour common talk.
Music and poesy use toquicken you.
The mathematics andmetaphysics,
fall to them as you findyour stomach serves you.
No profit grows where isno pleasure ta'en.
In brief, sir, study whatyou most affect.
Gramercies, Tranio, welldost thou advise.
If, Biondello, thou wertcome ashore,
we could at once put us inreadiness--
ow--
and take a lodging fit toentertain
such friends as time inPadua shall beget.
But stay a while.
What company is this?
Master, some show towelcome us to town.
Gentlemen, importune me nofarther,
for how I firmly amresolved you know;
that is, not bestow myyoungest daughter
before I have a husbandfor the elder.
If either of you both loveKatharina,
because I know you welland love you well,
leave shall you have tocourt her at your pleasure.
To cart her rather.
She's too rough for me.
There, there, Hortensio,will you any wife?
I pray you, sir, is ityour will
to make a stale of meamongst these mates?
Mates, maid, how mean youthat?
No mates for you
unless you were ofgentler, milder mold.
I' faith, sir, you shallnever need to fear.
I wis it is not halfway toher heart,
but if it were, doubt nother care should be
to comb your noddle with athree-legg'd stool
and paint your face anduse you like a fool.
From all such devils, goodLord deliver us.
And me too, good Lord.
Hush, master.
Here's some good pastimetoward.
That wench is stark mad orwonderful froward.
But in the other's silence
do I see maid's mildbehavior and sobriety.
Peace, Tranio.
Gentlemen, that I may soonmake good what I have said--
Bianca, get you in,
and let it not displeasethee, good Bianca,
for I will love thee ne'erthe less, my girl.
A pretty peat.
It is best put finger inthe eye,
an she knew why.
Sister, content you in mydiscontent.
Sir, to your pleasurehumbly I subscribe.
My books and instrumentsshall be my company,
on them to look andpractise by myself.
Hark, Tranio, thou may'sthear Minerva speak.
Signior Baptista, will yoube so strange?
Sorry am I that our goodwill effects Bianca's grief.
Why will you mew her up,Signior Baptista,
for this fiend of hell,
and make her bear thepenance of her tongue?
Gentlemen, content ye.
I am resolved.
Go in, Bianca.
And for I know she takethmost delight
in music, instruments, andpoetry,
schoolmasters will I havewithin my house,
fit to instruct her youth.
If you, Hortensio, or,Signior Gremio, you,
know any such, prefer themhither,
for to cunning men I willbe very kind
and liberal to mine ownchildren in good bringing up.
And so farewell.
Katharina, you may stay,
for I have more to communewith Bianca.
Why, and I trust I may gotoo, may I not?
What?
Shall I be appointedhours?
As though, belike,
I knew not what to takeand what to leave?
Ooh.
Ha!
Oh.
Phew.
You may go to the devil'sdam.
Your gifts are so good,here's none will hold you.
Their love is not sogreat, Hortensio,
but we may blow our nailstogether
and fast it fairly out.
Our cakes dough on bothsides.
Farewell.
And yet for the love Ibear my sweet Bianca,
if I can by any meanslight on a fit man
to teach her that whereinshe delights,
I will wish him to herfather.
So will I, Signior Gremio,
but a word, I pray.
Though the nature of ourquarrel yet never brookedparle,
know now, upon advice,
it touches us both
that we may yet again haveaccess
to our fair mistress andbe happy rivals
in Bianco's love,
to labor and effect onething specially.
What's that, I pray?
Marry, sir, to get ahusband for her sister.
A husband? A devil.
I say a husband.
I say a devil.
Thinkest thou, Hortensio,though her father be very rich,
any man is so very a foolto be married to hell?
Tush, Gremio, though itpass your patience and mine
to endure her loudalarums,
why, man, there be goodfellows in the world,
an a man should light onthem,
would take her with allfaults, and money enough.
I cannot tell,
but I had as lief take herdowry with this condition
to be whipped at the highcross every morning.
Faith, as you say, there'ssmall choice in rotten apples,
but come;
since this bar in lawmakes us friends,
it shall be so far forthfriendly maintained
till by helping Baptista'seldest daughter to a husband
we set his youngest freefor a husband
and then have to't afresh, hmm?
Sweet Bianca.
Happy man be his dole.
He that runs fastest getsthe ring.
How say you, SigniorGremio?
I am agreed,
and would I had given himthe best horse in Padua
to begin his wooing
that would thoroughly wooher, wed her and bed her,
and rid the house of her.
Come on.
I pray, sir, tell me, isit possible
that love should of asudden take such hold?
Tranio, till I found it tobe true,
I never thought itpossible or likely;
But see, while idly Istood looking on,
I found the effect of lovein idleness
and now in plainness doconfess to thee,
that art to me as secretand as dear
as Anna to the queen ofCarthage was,
Tranio, I burn, I pine, Iperish, Tranio,
if I achieve not thisyoung, modest girl.
Well, counsel me, Tranio,for I know thou canst.
Assist me, Tranio, for Iknow thou wilt.
Master, it is no time tochide you now.
Affection is not ratedfrom the heart.
If love have touch'd you,nought remains but so--
"Redime te captum quamqueas minimo."
Gramercies, lad, goforward; this contents:
the rest will comfort forthy counsel's sound.
Master, you look'd solongly on the maid,
perhaps you mark'd notwhat's the pith of all.
O yes, I saw sweet beautyin her face
such as the daughter ofAgenor had
that made great Jove tohumble him to her hand
when with his knees hekiss'd the Cretan strand.
Saw you no more?
Mark'd you not how hersister
began to scold and raiseup such a storm
that mortal ears mighthardly endure the din?
Tranio, I saw her corallips to move,
and with her breath, shedid perfume the air.
Sacred and sweet was all Isaw in her.
Nay, then, 'tis time tostir him from his trance.
I pray, awake, sir.
If you love the maid,
bend thoughts and wits toachieve her.
Thus it stands.
Her eldest sister is socursed and shrewd
that till the father ridhis hands of her,
Master, your love mustlive a maid at home.
Therefore has he closelymew'd her up,
because she will not beannoy'd with suitors.
Oh, Tranio, what a cruelfather's he.
But art thou not advised,
he took some care to gether cunning schoolmasters
to instruct her?
Ay, marry, am I, sir, andnow 'tis plotted.
I have it, Tranio.
Master, for my hand, bothour inventions meet andjump in one.
Well, tell me thine first.
You will be schoolmasterand undertake the teachingof the maid.
- That's your device. - Itis; may it be done?
Not possible, for whoshall bear your part,
and be in Padua hereVincentio's son,
keep house and ply hisbook, welcome his friends,
visit his countrymen andbanquet them?
Basta; content thee, for Ihave it full.
We have not yet been seenin any house,
nor can we liedistinguish'd by our facesfor man or master.
Then it follows thus,
thou shalt be master,Tranio, in my stead,
keep house and port andservants as I should.
I will some other be, someFlorentine,
some Neapolitan, or ameaner man of Pisa.
'Tis hatch'd and shall beso.
Tranio, at once, uncasethee.
Take my color'd hat andcloak.
When Biondello comes, hewaits on thee,
but I will charm him firstto keep his tongue.
So had you need.
In brief, sir, sith ityour pleasure is,
and I am tied to beobedient,
for so your father chargedme at our parting.
"Be serviceable to myson," quoth he,
although I think 'twas inanother sense.
I am content to beLucentio, because so wellI love Lucentio.
Tranio, be so, becauseLucentio loves,
and let me be a slave toachieve that maid
whose sudden sight haththrall'd my wounded eye.
Here comes the rogue.
Sirrah, where have youbeen?
Where have I been?
Nay, how now. Where areyou?
Dear Master, has my fellowTranio stolen your clothes?
Or you stolen his?
Or both? Pray, what's thenews?
Sirrah, come hither.
'Tis no time to jest, and feignyour manners to the time.
Your fellow Tranio here,to save my life,
puts my apparel and mycountenance on,
for in a quarrel since Icame ashore,
I kill'd a man and fear Iwas descried.
Wait you on him, I chargeyou, as becomes,
while I make way fromhence to save my life.
You understand me?
I, sir? Ne'er a whit.
And not a jot of Tranio inyour mouth.
Tranio is changed intoLucentio.
Yeah, the better for him.
Would I were so too.
So could I, faith, boy, tohave the next wish after,
that Lucentio indeed hadBaptista's youngest daughter.
But, sirrah, not for mysake but your master's,
I advise you use yourmanners discreetly in allkind of companies.
When I am alone, why, thenI am Tranio;
but in all places else,your master Lucentio.
Tranio, let's go.
One thing more rests thatthyself execute--
to make one among thesewooers--
if thou ask me why,sufficeth,
my reasons are both goodand weighty.
Verona, for a while, Itake my leave,
to see my friends inPadua,
but of all--
oh--
my best beloved andapproved friend, Hortensio;
and I trow this is hishouse.
Here, sirrah Grumio,knock, I say.
Knock, sir?
Whom should I knock?
Is there any man hasabused your worship?
Villain, I say, knock mehere soundly.
Knock you here, sir?
Why, what am I, sir, that Ishould knock you here, sir?
Villain, I say, knock meat this gate
and rap me well, or I'llknock your knave's pate.
My master is grownquarrelsome.
I should knock you first,
then I know after whocomes by the worst.
Will it not be?
Faith, sirrah,
an you'll not knock, I'llring it.
I'll try how you can sol,fa, and sing it.
Help, masters, help! Mymaster is mad!
Now, knock when I bid you,sirrah villain!
How now, what's thematter?
My old friend Grumio...
And my good friendPetruchio!
How do you all at Verona?
Signior Hortensio, comeyou to part the fray?
"Con tutto il cuore, bentrovato," may I say.
Ooh, um, "Alla nostra casaben venuto,
molto honorato signor mioPetruchio."
Rise, Grumio, rise.
Up, up, up, up.
We will compound thisquarrel.
Nay, sir, 'tis no matter,what he 'leges in Latin.
If this be not a lawful causefor me to leave his service,
look you, sir, he bid meknock him and rap himsoundly, sir.
Well, was it fit for aservant to use his master so,
being perhaps, for aught Isee, 2 and 30, a pip out,
whom to God I had wellknock'd at first,
then had not Grumio comeby the worst?
A senseless villain.
Good Hortensio, I bade therascal knock upon yourgate
and could not get him formy heart to do it.
Knock at the gate? Oheavens, spake you notthese words plain,
"Sirrah, knock me here, rapme here, knock me well,
knock me soundly"?
And come you now with,"Knock at the gate"?
Sirrah, be gone, or talknot, I advise you.
Petruchio, patience; I amGrumio's pledge.
Why, this's a heavy chance'twixt him and you,
your ancient, pleasant,trusty servant Grumio.
And tell me now, sweetfriend,
what happy gale blows you toPadua here from old Verona?
Oh, such wind as scattersyoung men through the world
to seek their fortunefarther than at home
where small experiencegrows.
But in a few, SigniorHortensio, thus it standswith me.
Antonio, my father, isdeceased,
Oh.
And I have thrust myselfinto this maze,
haply to wive and thriveas best I may.
Crowns in my purse I haveand goods at home,
and so am come abroad tosee the world.
Petruchio, shall I thencome roundly to thee
and wish thee to a shrewdill-favor'd wife?
Thou'ldst thank me but alittle for my counsel,
and yet I promise you, sheshall be rich, and very rich.
Yet thou'rt too much myfriend,
and I'll not wish thee toher.
Signior Hortensio, 'twixtsuch friends as we,
few words suffice;
and therefore, if thouknow one rich enough
to be Petruchio's wife,
as wealth is burden of mywooing dance,
be she as foul as wasFlorentius' love,
as old as Sibyl,
and as cursed and shrewdas Socrates' Xanthippe--
or a worse-- she moves menot,
or not removes, at least,affection's edge in me,
were she as rough as arethe Adriatic seas:
I come to wive itwealthily in Padua.
If wealthily, then happilyin Padua.
Nay, look you, sir, hetells you flatly what hismind is.
Why, give him gold enough,marry him to a puppet oran aglet-baby
or an old trot with ne'era tooth in her head,
though she have as manydiseases as 2 and 50 horses,
nothing comes amiss somoney comes withal.
But, Petruchio, since weare stepp'd thus far in,
I will continue that Ibroach'd in jest.
I can, Petruchio, helpthee to a wife
with wealth enough andyoung and beauteous,
brought up as best becomesa gentlewoman.
Her only fault, and thatis faults enough,
is that she is intolerablecursed and shrewd andfroward,
so beyond all measurethat,
were my state far worserthan it is,
I would not wed her for amine of gold.
Hortensio, peace.
Thou know'st not gold'seffect.
Tell me her father's name,and 'tis enough,
for I will board her,
though she chide as loudas thunder when the cloudsin autumn crack.
Her father is BaptistaMinola, an affable andcourteous gentleman.
Her name is KatharinaMinola,
renown'd in Padua for herscolding tongue.
I know her father, thoughI know not her.
He knew my deceased fatherwell.
I will not sleep,Hortensio, till I see her;
and therefore, let me bethus bold with you
to give you over at thisfirst encounter,
unless you will accompanyme thither.
I pray you, sir, let himgo while the humour lasts.
O' my word, an she knewhim as well as I do,
she would think scolding woulddo little good upon him.
She may perhaps call himhalf a score knaves or so.
That's nothing, an hebegin once, he'll rail inhis rope tricks.
I'll tell you what sir, anshe stand him but alittle,
he'll throw a figure inher face, so disfigure herwith it,
she shall have no more eyesto see withal than a cat.
You know him not, sir.
Tarry, Petruchio, I mustgo with thee,
for in Baptista's keep, mytreasure is.
He hath the jewel of mylife in hold--
his youngest daughter,beautiful Bianca--
and her withholds from meand other more,
suitors to her and rivalsin my love,
supposing it a thingimpossible
for those defects I havebefore rehearsed
that ever Katharina shallbe woo'd.
Therefore, this order hathBaptista ta'en
that none shall haveaccess unto Bianca
till Katharine the cursedhave got a husband.
Katharine the cursed, atitle for a maid, of alltitles the worst.
Now shall my friendPetruchio do me grace
and offer me disguised insober robes
to old Baptista as aschoolmaster
well seen in music toinstruct Bianca
that so I may by thisdevice
at least have leave andleisure to make love to her
and, unsuspected, courther by herself.
Here's no knavery.
See, to beguile the oldfolks,
how the young folks laytheir heads together.
Master, master, look aboutyou. Who goes there, ha?
Oh, oh, peace, Grumio.
It is the rival of mylove.
Petruchio, stand by awhile.
O, very well.
I have perused the note.
Hark you, sir,
I'll have them very fairlybound:
all books of love, seethat at any hand;
and see you read no otherlectures to her,
you understand me.
Over and beside SigniorBaptista's liberality,
I'll mend it with alargess.
Take your paper too,
and let me have them verywell perfumed,
for she is sweeter thanperfume itself
to whom they go to.
Mm.
Nay, what will you read toher?
Whate'er I read to her,I'll plead for you
as for my patron, standyou so assured,
as firmly as yourself werestill in place.
Yea, and perhaps with moresuccessful words than you--
Hmm?
Unless you were a scholar,sir.
O this learning, what athing it is.
O this woodcock, what anass it is.
Grumio, mum.
God save you, SigniorGremio.
And you are well met,Signior Hortensio.
Trow you whither I amgoing?
To Baptista Minola.
I promised to inquirecarefully
about a schoolmaster forthe fair Bianca,
and by good fortune,
I have lighted well onthis young man,
for learning and behaviorfit for her turn,
well read in poetry andother books, good ones, Iwarrant ye.
'Tis well; and I have meta gentleman
hath promised me to showme to another,
a fine musician toinstruct our mistress;
so shall I no whit be behindin duty to fair Bianca,
so beloved of me.
Beloved of me, and that mydeeds shall prove.
And that his bags shallprove.
Gremio, 'tis now no timeto vent our love.
Listen to me, and if youspeak me fair,
I'll tell you newsindifferent good for either.
Here is a gentleman bychance I met,
upon agreement from us tohis liking,
will undertake to woocursed Katharine.
Huh?
Yea, and to marry her
if her dowry please.
So said, so done, is well.
Hortensio, have you toldhim all her faults?
I know she is an irksome,brawling scold.
If that be all, masters, Ihear no harm.
No, say'st me so, friend?
What countryman?
Born in Verona, oldAntonio's son.
My father dead--
Oh.
my fortune lives for me,
and I do hope good daysand long to see.
O sir, such a life, withsuch a wife, were strange,
but if you have a stomach,to't i' God's name.
You shall have meassisting you in all.
But will you woo thiswildcat?
Will I live?
Will he woo her? Aye, orI'll hang her.
Why came I hither but tothat intent?
Think you a little din candaunt mine ears?
Have I not in my timeheard lions roar?
Have I not heard the sea,puff'd up with winds,
rage like an angry boarchafed with sweat?
Have I not heard greatordnance in the field,
and heaven's artillerythunder in the skies?
Have I not, in a pitchedbattle, heard
loud 'larums, neighingsteeds, and trumpets' clang?
And do you tell me of awoman's tongue
that gives not half sogreat a blow to hear
as will a chestnut in afarmer's fire?
Tush, tush. Fear boys withbugs.
For he fears none.
Hortensio, hark,
this gentleman is happilyarrived,
my mind presumes, for hisown good and ours.
Mm, I promised we would becontributors
and bear his charge ofwooing, whatsoe'er.
And so we will, providedthat he win her.
I would I were as sure ofa good dinner.
Gentlemen, God save you.
If I may be bold, tell me,I beseech you,
which is the readiest way
to the house of SigniorBaptista Minola?
He that has the two fairdaughters?
Is't he you mean?
Even he, Biondello.
Hark you, sir, you meannot her to--
Perhaps, him and her, sir.
What have you to do?
Not her that chides, sir,at any hand, I pray.
I love no chiders, sir.
Biondello, let's away.
Well begun, Tranio.
Sir, a word ere you go.
Are you a suitor to themaid you talk of,
yea or no?
And if I be, sir, is itany offence?
No, if without more wordsyou will get you hence.
Why, sir, I pray, are notthe streets as free
for me as for you?
But so is not she.
For what reason, I beseechyou?
For this reason, if you'llknow,
that she's the choice loveof Signior Gremio.
That she's the chosen ofSignior Hortensio.
Softly, my masters.
If you be gentlemen, do methis right.
Hear me with patience.
Baptista is a noblegentleman
to whom my father is notall unknown,
and were his daughterfairer than she is,
she may more suitors haveand me for one.
Fair Leda's daughter had athousand wooers.
Then well one more mayfair Bianca have,
and so she shall.
Lucentio shall make one,
though Paris came in hopeto speed alone.
What, this gentleman willout-talk us all.
Sir, give him head.
I know he'll prove a jade.
Hortensio, to what end areall these words?
Sir, let me be so bold asask you,
did you yet ever seeBaptista's daughter?
No, sir, but hear I dothat he hath two,
the one as famous for ascolding tongue
as is the other forbeauteous modesty.
Sir, sir, the first's forme.
Let her go by.
Yea, leave that labor togreat Hercules,
and let it be more thanAlcides' 12.
Sir, understand you thisof me in sooth.
The youngest daughter,whom you hearken for,
her father keeps from allaccess of suitors
and will not promise herto any man
until the elder sisterfirst be wed.
The younger then is freeand not before.
If it be so, sir,
that you are the man muststead us all--
and me amongst the rest--
and if you break the iceand do this feat,
achieve the elder,
and set the younger freefor our access,
whose hap shall be to haveher
will not so graceless beto be ingrate.
Sir, you say well, andwell you do conceive,
and since you do professto be a suitor,
you must, as we do,gratify this gentleman
to whom we all--all restgenerally beholding.
Sir, I shall not be slack.
In sign whereof,
please you we may contrivethis afternoon
and quaff carouses to ourmistress' health
and do as adversaries doin law--
strive mightily but eatand drink as friends.
Excellent motion.
Let's be gone.
The motion's good indeed,and be it so.
Petruchio, I shall be yourben venuto.
Um--
Ah!
Uh!
Cah!
Ah!
Mm.
Ha!
Ah.
Uh.
Good sister,
wrong me not, nor wrongyourself,
to make a bondmaid and aslave of me.
That, I disdain--
Ah!
But for these other gawds,
unbind my hands.
I'll pull them off myself,
yea, all my raiment to mypetticoat,
or what you will commandme will I do
so well do I know my dutyto my elders.
Of all thy suitors, here Icharge thee,
tell whom thou lovestbest.
See thou dissemble not!
Believe me, sister, of allthe men alive,
I never yet beheld thatspecial face
which I could fancy morethan any other.
Minion, thou liest!
Is't not Hortensio?
Oh, if you affect him,sister, here I swear,
I'll plead for you myself,but you shall have him.
O then, belike, you fancyriches more.
You will have Gremio tokeep you fair.
Ah! Aha!
Is it for him you do envyme so?
Nay, then you jest,
and now, I well perceive
you have but jested withme all this while.
I prithee, sister Kate,untie my hands!
If that be jest, then allthe rest was so!
You!
Why, how now, dame!
Bianca!
Whence grows thisinsolence?
Stand aside.
Poor girl, she weeps.
Go ply thy needle.
Meddle not with her.
For shame, thou hilding ofa devilish spirit.
Why dost thou wrong herthat did ne'er wrong thee?
When did she cross theewith a bitter word?
Her silence flouts me!
And I'll be revenged!
What, in my sight?
Bianca, get thee in.
Oh!
What, will you not sufferme?
Nay, now I see she is yourtreasure.
She must have a husband.
I must dance barefoot onher wedding day
and for your love to herlead apes in hell!
Oh, talk not to me!
I will go sit and weep
till I can find occasionof revenge.
Ah, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,ha, ha!
Ah, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!
Was ever gentleman thusgrieved as I?
Ahem.
But who comes here?
Good morrow, neighborBaptista.
Good morrow, SigniorGremio.
God save you, gentlemen.
And you, good sir.
Pray, have you not adaughter call'd Katharina,
fair and virtuous?
Ah!
I have a daughter, sir,called Katharina.
You are too blunt.
Go to it orderly.
You wrong me, SigniorGremio.
Give me leave.
I am a gentleman ofVerona, sir,
that, hearing of herbeauty and her wit,
her affability and bashfulmodesty, her--
Oh, ho!
wondrous qualities andmild behavior,
am bold to show myself
a forward guest withinyour house,
to make mine eye thewitness
of that report which I sooft have heard.
Ah, ha!
And, for an entrance to myentertainment,
I do present you with aman of mine,
cunning in music and themathematics,
to instruct her fully inthose sciences,
whereof I know she is notignorant.
Accept of him, or else youdo me wrong.
His name is Licio, born inMantua.
You're welcome, sir, andhe, for your good sake,
but for my daughterKatharine, this I know,
she is not for your turn,the more my grief.
I see you do not mean topart with her,
or else you like not of mycompany.
Mistake me not; I speakbut as I find.
Whence are you, sir?
What may I call your name?
Petruchio is my name,Antonio's son,
a man well-knownthroughout all Italy.
I know him well.
Oh, no.
You are welcome for hissake.
Saving your tale,Petruchio, I pray,
let us that are poorpetitioners speak too:
Baccare, you aremarvellous forward.
O, pardon me, Signior Gremio;I would fain be doing.
I doubt it not, sir,
but you will curse yourwooing.
Neighbor, this is a giftvery grateful,
I am sure of it.
To express the like kindness,myself that have been
more kindly beholding toyou than any,
freely give unto you thisyoung scholar,
that hath been longstudying at Rheims,
as cunning in Greek andLatin and other languages
as the other in music andmathematics.
His name is--
Cambio.
Pray, accept his service.
A thousand thanks, SigniorGremio.
You are welcome, goodCambio.
But, gentle sir, methinksyou walk like a stranger.
May I be so bold to knowthe cause of your coming?
Pardon me, sir, theboldness is mine own,
that, being a stranger inthis city here,
do make myself a suitor toyour daughter,
unto Bianca, fair andvirtuous.
Nor is your firm resolveunknown to me
in the preferment of theelder sister.
This liberty is all that Irequest:
that, upon knowledge of myparentage,
I may have welcome 'mongstthe rest that woo
and free access and favouras the rest,
and toward the educationof your daughters,
I here bestow a simpleinstrument,
and this small packet ofGreek and Latin books.
If you accept them, thentheir worth is great.
Lucentio is your name.
Of whence, I pray?
Of Pisa, sir, son toVincentio.
A mighty man of Pisa.
By report, I know himwell.
You are very welcome, sir,
take you the lute and youthe set of books.
You shall go see yourpupils presently.
Holla, within.
Sirrah, lead thesegentlemen to my daughters,
and tell them both theseare their tutors.
Bid them use them well.
We will go walk a littlein the orchard, and thento dinner.
You are passing welcome,
and so I pray you all tothink yourselves.
Signior Baptista, mybusiness asketh haste,
and every day, I cannotcome to woo.
You knew my father well,and in him me,
left solely heir to allhis lands and goods,
which I have better'drather than decreased.
Then tell me, if I getyour daughter's love,
what dowry shall I havewith her to wife?
After my death, the onehalf of my lands
and in possession 20,000crowns.
And for that dowry,
I'll assure her of herwidowhood,
be it that she survive me,
in all my lands and leaseswhatsoever.
Let specialties betherefore drawn between us
that covenants may be kepton either hand.
Ay, when the special thingis well obtain'd--
that is, her love,
for that is all in all.
Why, that is nothing,
for I tell you, father,
I am as peremptory as sheproud-minded,
and where two raging firesmeet together,
they do consume the thingthat feeds their fury.
Though little fire growsgreat with little wind,
yet extreme gusts willblow out fire and all.
So I to her, and so sheyields to me,
for I am rough and woo notlike a babe, hmm?
Well mayst thou woo, andhappy be thy speed,
but be thou arm'd for someunhappy words.
Ay, to the proof;
as mountains are forwinds,
that shake not though theyblow perpetually.
Uh, uh, uh!
How now, my friend, whydost thou look so pale?
For fear, I promise you,if I look pale.
What, will my daughterprove a good musician?
Ah, uh!
I think she'll soonerprove a soldier.
Iron may hold with her butnever lutes.
Why, then thou canst notbreak her to the lute?
Why, no, for she hathbroke the lute to me.
I did but tell her shemistook her frets
and bow'd her hand toteach her fingering
when, with a mostimpatient devilish spirit,
"Frets, call you these?"quoth she,
"I'll fume with them."
And with that word, shestruck me on the head,
and through the instrument,my pate made way;
and there I stood amazedfor a while,
as on a pillory, lookingthrough the lute,
while she did call merascal fiddler
and twangling Jack
and 20 such vile terms
as had she studied tomisuse me so.
Ooh.
Now, by the world, it is alusty wench.
I love her ten times morethan ever I did.
O, how I long to have somechat with her.
Well, go with me, and benot so discomfited.
Proceed in practise withmy younger daughter.
She's apt to learn andthankful for good turns.
Signior Petruchio, willyou go with us?
Or shall I send mydaughter Kate to you?
I pray you do.
Come.
I'll attend her here...
and woo her with somespirit when she comes.
Say that she rail.
Why, then, I'll tell herplain
she sings as sweetly as anightingale.
Say that she frown.
I'll say she looks asclear
as morning roses newlywash'd with dew.
Say she be mute and willnot speak a word.
Then I'll commend hervolubility
and say she utterethpiercing eloquence.
If she do bid me pack,
I'll give her thanks asthough she bid me stay byher a week.
If she deny to wed,
I'll crave the day when Ishall ask the banns
and when be married.
But here she comes, andnow, Petruchio, speak.
Good morrow, Kate...
for that's your name, Ihear.
Well have you heard, butsomething hard of hearing.
They call me Katharinethat do talk of me.
You lie, in faith, for youare call'd plain Kate
and bonny Kate andsometimes Kate the cursed,
but Kate, the prettiestKate in Christendom,
Kate of Kate Hall,
my super dainty Kate,
for dainties are allKates--
Ha, ha, ha!
And therefore, Kate,
take this of me, Kate ofmy consolation,
hearing thy mildnesspraised in every town,
thy virtues spoke of, andthy beauty sounded--
yet not so deeply as tothee belongs--
myself am moved to woothee for my wife.
"Moved"--in good time.
Let him that moved youhither remove you hence.
I knew you at the firstyou were a moveable.
Why, what's a moveable?
A join'd stool.
Thou hast hit it.
Come, sit on me.
Asses are made to bear,
and so are you.
Women are made to bear,
No such jade as you, if meyou mean.
Alas, good Kate, I willnot burden thee,
for, knowing thee to bebut young and light--
Too light for such a swainas you to catch
and yet as heavy as myweight should be.
Should be-- should--buzz--
Well ta'en,
and like a buzzard.
O slow-wing'd turtle,shall a buzzard take thee?
Ay, for a turtle, as hetakes a buzzard.
Come, come, you wasp, i'faith, you are too angry.
If I be waspish, bestbeware my sting.
My remedy is then to pluckit out.
Ay, if the fool could findit where it lies.
Who knows not where a waspdoes wear his sting?
In his tail.
In his tongue.
Whose tongue?
Yours, if you talk oftails,
and so farewell.
What, with my tongue inyour tail?
Nay, come again, goodKate.
I am a gentleman.
That I'll try.
Mm-hmm.
I swear I'll cuff you ifyou strike again.
So may you lose your arms.
If you strike me, you areno gentleman,
and if no gentleman, why,then, no arms.
A herald, Kate?
Ooh, put me in thy books.
What is your crest?
A coxcomb?
A combless cock, so Katewill be my hen.
No cock of mine.
You crow too like acraven.
Er-bock, bock, bock, bock.
Nay, come, Kate, come.
You must not look so sour.
It is my fashion when Isee a crab.
Why, here's no crab, andtherefore look not sour.
Oh, ho, ho, there is.
Bock, bock, bock, bock.
Then show it me.
Had I a glass, I would.
What, you mean my face?
Well aim'd of such a youngone.
Now, by Saint George, I amtoo young for you.
Yet you are wither'd.
'Tis with cares.
I care not.
Nay, hear you, Kate.
In sooth you scape not so.
I chafe you if I tarry.
Let me go!
No, not a whit.
I find you passing gentle.
'Twas told me you wererough and coy and sullen,
and now I find report avery liar,
for thou are pleasant,gamesome, passing courteous,
but slow in speech
yet sweet as springtimeflowers.
Ah, thou canst not frown.
Thou canst not lookaskance
nor bite the lip as angrywenches will,
nor hast thou pleasure tobe cross in talk,
but thou with mildnessentertain'st thy wooers,
with gentle conference,soft and affable.
Why does the world reportthat Kate doth limp?
O slanderous world.
Kate, like the hazel-twig,
is straight and slenderand as brown in hue
as hazelnuts and sweeterthan the kernels.
Let me see thee walk.
Thou dost not halt.
Go, fool, and whom thoukeep'st command.
Did e'er Dian so become agrove as Kate
this chamber with herprincely gait?
O, be thou Dian, and lether be Kate,
and then let Kate bechaste and Dian sportful.
Where did you study allthis goodly speech?
It is extempore, from mymother wit.
A witty mother...
witless else her son.
Am I not wise?
Yes; keep you warm.
Marry, so I mean, sweetKatharine, in thy bed,
and therefore,
setting all this chataside,
thus in plain terms.
Your father hath consentedthat you shall be my wife,
your dowry 'greed on,
and will you, nill you,
I will marry you.
Now, Kate, I am a husbandfor your turn,
for, by this light,whereby I see thy beauty--
thy beauty that doth makeme like thee well--
thou must be married to noman but me,
for I am he am born totame you, Kate,
and bring you from a wildKate
to a Kate conformable asother household Kates.
Ahem.
Here comes your father.
Never make denial,
I must and will haveKatharine to my wife.
Now, Signior Petruchio, howspeed you with my daughter?
How but well, sir? How butwell?
It were impossible Ishould speed amiss.
Why, how now, daughterKatharine?
In your dumps?
Call you me daughter?
Now, I promise you, you showa tender fatherly regard
to wish me wed to one halflunatic,
a madcap ruffian, and aswearing Jack
that thinks with oaths toface the matter out.
Bock, bock.
Father, 'tis thus,
yourself and all the worldthat talk'd of her
have talk'd amiss of her.
Bock, bock.
If she be cursed, it isfor policy,
for she's not froward butmodest as the dove.
She is not hot buttemperate as the morn.
For patience, she willprove a second Grissel
and Roman Lucrece for herchastity;
and to conclude, we haveagreed so well together
that upon Sunday is thewedding day.
Ho, ho, ho, ho, ho, ho,ho.
I'll see thee hang'd onSunday first.
Ha, ha, ha, ha.
Hark, Petruchio,
she says she'll see theehang'd first.
Is this your speeding?
Nay, then, good night ourpart.
Ah, ha, ha, be patient,gentlemen.
I choose her for myself.
If she and I be pleased,what's that to you?
'Tis bargain'd 'twixt ustwain, being alone,
that she shall still becursed in company.
Oh, I tell you, 'tisincredible to believe
how much she loves me.
O, the kindest Kate,
she hung about my neck,
and, kiss on kiss, shevied so fast,
protesting oath on oath,
that in a twink she won meto her love.
O, you are novices.
'Tis a world to see howtame,
when men and women arealone,
a meacock wretch can makethe cursedest shrew.
Give me thy hand, Kate.
I will unto Venice to buyapparel
'gainst the wedding day.
Provide the feast, father,and bid the guests.
I will be sure myKatharine will be fine.
I know not what to say,
but give me your hands.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,ha, ha.
God send you joy,Petruchio!
Ah, ha, ha!
'Tis a match.
Amen, say we.
We will be witnesses.
Witnesses.
Father and wife andgentlemen,
adieu.
I will to Venice.
Sunday comes apace.
We will have rings andthings and fine array,
and kiss me, Kate.
Ha!
We will be married onSunday.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,ha, ha.
Was ever match clapp'd upso suddenly?
Faith, gentlemen, now Iplay a merchant's part
and venture madly on adesperate mart.
'Twas a commodity layfretting by you.
'Twill bring you gain orperish on the seas.
The gain I seek is quietin the match.
No doubt but he hath got aquiet catch.
But now, Baptista, to youryounger daughter.
Now is the day we longhave looked for.
I am your neighbor and wassuitor first.
And I am one that loveBianca
more than words canwitness or your thoughtscan guess.
Youngling, thou canst notlove so dear as I.
Graybeard, thy love dothfreeze.
But thine doth fry.
Skipper, stand back.
'Tis age that nourisheth.
Ah, but youth in ladies'eyes that flourisheth.
Content you, gentlemen.
I will compound thisstrife.
'Tis deeds must win theprize,
and he of both that canassure my daughtergreatest dower
shall have my Bianca'slove.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!
Oh, say, Signior Gremio,what can you assure her?
Oh.
First, as you know,
my house within the city
is richly furnished withplate and gold,
basins and ewers to laveher dainty hands,
my hangings all of Tyriantapestry.
In ivory coffers, I havestuff'd my crowns,
in cypress chests, myarras counterpoints,
costly apparel, tents, andcanopies,
fine linen,
Turkey cushions boss'dwith pearl,
valance of Venice gold inneedlework,
pewter and brass and allthings
that belong to house orhousekeeping.
Ahem.
Then, at my farm,
I have a hundredmilch-kine to the pail,
sixscore fat oxen standingin my stalls,
and all things answerableto this portion.
Myself am struck in years,I must confess,
and if I die tomorrow,this is hers
if, whilst I live, shewill be only mine.
That "only" came well in.
Sir, list to me.
I am my father's heir andonly son.
If I may have yourdaughter to my wife,
I'll leave her housesthree or four as good
within rich Pisa's walls
as any one Old SigniorGremio has in Padua
beside 2,000 ducats by theyear of fruitful land,
all which shall be herjointure.
What, have I pinch'd you,Signior Gremio?
2,000 ducats by the yearof land.
My land amounts not to somuch in all.
That she shall havebesides an argosy
that now is lying inMarseilles' road.
What, have I choked youwith an argosy?
Gremio, 'tis known myfather
hath no less than 3 greatargosies
beside 2 galliasses and 12tight galleys.
These I will assure her
and twice as much whate'erthou offer'st next.
Nay, I have offer'd all.
I have no more,
and she can have no morethan all I have.
If you like me, she shallhave me and mine.
Why, then the maid is minefrom all the world
by your firm promise.
Gremio is out-vied.
I must confess, your offeris the best,
and let your father makeher the assurance,
she is your own,
else, you must pardon me,
if you should die beforehim, where's her dower?
That's but a cavil.
He is old; I, young.
And may not young men dieas well as old?
Well, gentlemen,
I am thus resolved.
On Sunday next, you knowmy daughter Katharine
is to be married.
Ha, ha, ha, ha!
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha!
Now, on the Sundayfollowing shall Bianca bebride to you
if you make thisassurance.
If not, to Signior Gremio.
And so, I take my leave...
and thank you both.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,ha, ha, ha.
Adieu, good neighbor.
Now I fear thee not.
Sirrah young gamester,
your father were a fool togive thee all
and in his waning age setfoot under thy table.
Tut, a toy!
An old Italian fox is notso kind, my boy.
A vengeance on your craftywither'd hide!
Yet I have faced it with acard of ten.
'Tis in my head to do mymaster good.
Oh, I see no reason butsupposed Lucentio
must get a father call'd"supposed Vincentio,"
and that's a wonder.
Fathers commonly do gettheir children,
but in this case ofwooing,
a child shall get a sire ifI fail not of my cunning.
Fiddler, forbear.
You grow too forward, sir.
Have you so soon forgotthe entertainment
her sister Katharinewelcomed you withal?
Ooh, but, wranglingpedant,
this is the patroness ofheavenly harmony.
Then give me leave to haveprerogative,
and when in music, we havespent an hour,
your lecture shall haveleisure for as much.
Preposterous ass thatnever read so far
to know the cause whymusic was ordain'd.
Was it not to refresh themind of man
after his studies or hisusual pain?
Then give me leave to readphilosophy,
and while I pause, servein your harmony.
Sirrah, I will not bearthese braves of thine.
Oh, you--
Why, gentlemen, you do medouble wrong
to strive for that whichresteth in my choice.
I am no breeching scholarin the schools.
I'll not be tied to hoursnor 'pointed times
but learn my lessons as Iplease myself.
And to cut off all strife,here sit we down.
Ah.
Take you your instrument,and play you the whiles.
His lecture will be doneere you have tuned.
You'll leave his lecturewhen I am in tune?
That will be never.
Tune your instrument.
Where left we last?
Here, madam:
"Hic ibat Simois; hic estSigeia tellus;
Hic steterat Priami regiacelsa senis."
Construe them.
"Hic ibat"--
As I told you before--
"Simois"--
I am Lucentio--
"Hic est"--
son unto Vincentio ofPisa--
"sigeia tellus"--
disguised thus to get yourlove--
"Hic steterat"--
and that Lucentio thatcomes a-wooing--
"Priami"--
is my man Tranio--
"regia"--
bearing my port--
"celsa senis."
that we might beguile theold pantaloon.
Madam, my instrument's intune.
O, let's hear.
O fie, the treble jars.
Spit in the hole, man, andtune again.
Tsk.
Now let me see if I canconstrue it.
"Hic ibat Simois"--
I know you not.
"Hic est Sigeia tellus"--
I trust you not.
"Hic steterat Priami"--
Take heed he hear us not.
"regia"--
Hmm.
Presume not.
"celsa senis."
Despair not.
Madam, 'tis now in tune.
All but the base.
The base is right.
'Tis the base knave thatjars.
How fiery and forward ourpedant is.
Now, for my life, theknave doth court my love.
Pedascule, I'll watch youbetter yet.
In time I may believe, yetI mistrust.
Mistrust it not,
for, sure, Aeacides wasAjax,
call'd so from hisgrandfather.
I must believe my master,else, I promise you,
I should be arguing stillupon that doubt.
But let it rest.
Now, Licio, to you.
Good master, take it notunkindly, pray,
that I have been thuspleasant with you both.
You may go walk and giveme leave a while, hmm?
My lessons make no musicin three parts.
Are you so formal, sir?
Well, I must wait andwatch withal,
for but I be deceived,
our fine musician growethamorous.
Madam, before you touchthe instrument,
to learn the order of myfingering,
I must begin withrudiments of art,
to teach you gamut in abriefer sort,
more pleasant, pithy, andeffectual,
than hath been taught byany of my trade;
and there it is inwriting, fairly drawn.
Why, I am past my gamutlong ago.
But read the gamut ofHortensio.
Read it.
"'Gamut'-- I am the groundof all accord--
"'A re'-- to pleadHortensio's passion.
"'B mi'-- Bianca, take himfor thy lord--
"'C fa ut'-- that loveswith all affection.
"'D sol re'-- One clef,two notes have I.
'E la mi'-- Show pity, orI die."
Call you this gamut?
I like it not:
Old fashions please mebest.
I am not so nice as tochange true rules
for old inventions.
Mistress,
your father prays you,leave your books
and help to dress yoursister's chamber up.
You know tomorrow is thewedding-day.
Farewell, sweet mastersboth.
I must be gone.
Oh.
Faith, mistress, then Ihave no cause to stay.
But I have cause to pryinto this pedant.
Methinks he looks asthough he were in love.
Yet if thy thoughts,Bianca, be so humble
to cast thy wandering eyeson any stale,
seize thee that list.
If once I find theeranging,
Hortensio will be quitwith thee by changing.
Signior Lucentio, this isthe 'pointed day
that Katharina and Petruchioshould be married,
and yet we hear not of ourson-in-law.
What will be said?
What mockery will it be
to want the bridegroomwhen the priest attends
to speak the ceremonialrites of marriage?
What says Lucentio to thisshame of ours?
No shame but mine.
I must, forsooth, be forced
to give my hand opposedagainst my heart
unto a mad-brained rudesbyfull of spleen
who woos in haste andmeans to wed at leisure.
I told you, I, he was afrantic fool,
hiding his bitter jests inblunt behavior,
and to be noted for amerry man,
he'll woo a thousand,'point the day of marriage,
make feasts, invite friends,and proclaim the banns,
yet never means to wedwhere he hath woo'd.
Now must the world pointat poor Katharine
and say, "Lo, there is madPetruchio's wife,
if it would please himcome and marry her."
Patience, good Katharine,and Baptista too.
Upon my life, Petruchiomeans but well
whatever fortune stays himfrom his word.
Though he be blunt, I knowhim passing wise.
Though he be merry, yetwithal, he's honest.
Would Katharine had neverseen him though.
Go, girl.
I cannot blame thee now toweep,
for such an injury wouldvex a very saint,
much more a shrew of thyimpatient humor.
Master, master, news,
and such old news as younever heard of.
Is it new and old too?
How may that be?
Why, is it not news to hearof Petruchio's coming?
Is he come?
Why, no, sir.
What then?
He's coming.
When will he be here?
When he stands where I amand sees you there.
But say, what to thine oldnews?
Why, Petruchio is comingin a new hat
and an old jerkin, a pair ofold breeches thrice turned,
a pair of boots that havebeen candle-cases,
one buckled, another laced,
an old rusty sword ta'enout of the town armorywith a broken hilt
and chapeless with twobroken points,
his horse hipped with anold mothy saddle
and stirrups of no kindred;besides, possessed with theglanders
and like to mose in the chine,troubled with the lampas,
infected with the fashions,full of windgalls,
sped with spavins, rayedwith yellows,
past cure of the fives, starkspoiled with the staggers,
begnawn with the bots,swayed in the back andshoulder-shotten,
near-legged before andwith a half-checked bit
and a headstall of sheep'sleather
which, being restrained tokeep him from stumbling,
hath been often burst andnow repaired with knots;
one girth six-times pieced anda woman's crupper of velure
which hath two letters forher name fairly set downin studs
and here and there piecedwith packthread.
Who comes with him?
O, sir, his lackey, forall the world caparisonedlike the horse,
with a linen stock on one leg
and a kersey boot-hose onthe other,
gartered with a red andblue list, yeah;
an old hat and "the humorof 40 fancies"
pricked in't for a feather:
a monster, a very monsterin apparel,
and not like a Christianfootboy
or a gentleman's lackey.
'Tis some odd humor prickshim to this fashion,
yet oftentimes, he goesbut mean-apparell'd.
I am glad he's comes,howsoe'er he comes.
Why, sir, he comes not.
Oh!
Oh, didst thou not say hecomes?
Who? That Petruchio came?
Ay, that Petruchio came!
No, sir, I say his horsecomes, with him on his back.
Why, that's all one.
Nay, by Saint Jamy,
I hold you a penny,
a horse and a man is morethan one
and yet not many.
Where be these gallants?
Who's at home?
Ha, ha!
You are welcome, sir.
And yet I come not well.
And yet you halt not.
Not so well apparell'd asI wish you were.
Were it not better, Ishould rush in thus.
But where is Kate?
Where is my lovely bride?
How does my father?
Ah, ha, ha, ha, ha.
Gentles, methinks youfrown,
and wherefore gaze thisgoodly company
as if they saw somewondrous monument,
some comet, or unusualprodigy?
Why, sir, you know this isyour wedding day.
First, we were sad, fearingyou would not come,
now sadder that you comeso unprovided.
Fie, doff this habit,shame to your estate,
an eyesore to our solemnfestival.
And tell us what occasionof import
hath all so long detain'dyou from your wife
and sent you hither sounlike yourself?
Tedious it were to telland harsh to hear.
Sufficeth, I am come tokeep my word,
though in some partenforced to digress,
which, at more leisure, Ishall so explain
as you shall well besatisfied withal.
But where is Kate?
I stay too long from her.
The morning wears.
'Tis time we were atchurch.
See not your bride inthese unreverent robes.
Go--go--go to my chamber.
Put on clothes of mine.
Not I, believe me.
Thus, I'll visit her.
But thus, I trust, youwill not marry her.
Good sooth, even so.
Therefore, ha' done withwords.
To me she's married, notunto my clothes.
Could I repair what shewill wear in me
as I can change these pooraccoutrements,
'twere well for me andbetter for my Kate.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
But what a fool am I tochat with you
when I should bid goodmorrow to my bride
and seal the title with alovely kiss.
Ah!
He hath some meaning inhis mad attire.
We will persuade him, beit possible,
put on better ere he go tochurch.
I'll after him and see theevent of this.
But to her love concerneth usto add her father's liking
which, to bring to pass,as I before unparted toyour worship,
I am to get a man.
Eh?
Whate'er he be, it skillsnot much.
We'll fit him to our turn,
and he shall be Vincentioof Pisa
and make assurance here inPadua
of greater sums than Ihave promised.
So shall you quietly enjoyyour hope
and marry sweet Biancawith consent.
Were it not that my fellowschoolmaster
doth watch Bianca's stepsso narrowly,
'twere good, methinks, tosteal our marriage,
which once perform'd-- letall the world say no--
I'll keep mine own despiteof all the world.
That by degrees we mean tolook into
and watch our vantage inthis business.
We'll overreach thegraybeard, Gremio,
the narrow-prying father,Minola,
the quaint musician,amorous Licio
all for my master's sake,Lucentio.
Oh, Signior Gremio, cameyou from the church?
Oh, as willingly as e'er Icame from school.
And is the bride andbridegroom coming home?
Bridegroom say you?
'Tis a groom indeed, agrumbling groom,
and that the girl shallfind.
Curseder than she?
Why, it is impossible.
Why, he's a devil, adevil, a very fiend.
Why, she's a devil, adevil, the devil's dam.
Tut, she's a lamb, a dove,a fool to him.
I'll tell you, SirLucentio,
when the priest should ask ifKatharine should be his wife,
"Ay, by gogs-wouns," quothhe and swore so loud
that, all-amazed, thepriest let fall the book,
and as he stoop'd again totake it up,
this mad-brain'd bridegroomtook him such a cuff
that down fell priest andbook and book and priest.
"Now take them up," quothhe, "if any list."
What said the wench whenhe rose again?
Trembled and shook, for,why, he stamp'd and swore
as if the vicar meant tocozen him.
But after many ceremoniesdone, he calls for wine.
"Her health," quoth he asif he had been aboard,
carousing to his matesafter a storm,
quaff'd off the muscadel
and threw the sops all inthe sexton's face,
having no other reason
but that his beard grewthin and hungerly
and seem'd to ask him sopsas he was drinking.
This done, he took thebride about the neck
and kiss'd her lips withsuch a clamorous smack
that at the parting allthe church did echo,
and, I, seeing this camethence for very shame,
and after me, I know, therout is coming.
Such a mad marriage neverwas before.
Hark, hark, I hear theminstrels play.
Gentlemen and friends, Ithank you for your pains.
I know you think to dinewith me today
and have prepared greatstore of wedding cheer,
but so it is my haste dothcall me hence,
and therefore, here I meanto take my leave.
Is't possible you willaway tonight?
I must away today, beforenight comes.
Make it no wonder.
If you knew my business,
you would entreat merather go than stay.
And, honest company, Ithank you all
that have beheld me giveaway myself
to this most patient,sweet, and virtuous wife.
Dine with my father.
Drink a health to me, forI must hence, and farewellto you all.
Let us entreat you staytill after dinner.
It may not be.
- Let me entreat you. - Itcannot be.
- Let me entreat you. - Iam content.
You are content to stay?
I am content you shallentreat me stay, but yetnot stay.
Entreat me how you can.
Now, if you love me, stay.
Grumio, my horse.
Ay, sir, they be ready.
The oats have eaten thehorses.
Nay, then, do what thoucanst.
I will not go today,
no, nor tomorrow, not tillI please myself.
The door is open, sir.
There lies your way.
You may be jogging whilesyour boots are green.
For me, I'll not be gonetill I please myself!
'Tis like you'll prove ajolly surly groom
that take it on you at thefirst so roundly.
O Kate, content thee.
Prithee, be not angry.
I will be angry!
What hast thou to do?
Father, be quiet!
He shall stay my leisure.
Ay, marry, sir, now itbegins to work.
Gentlemen, forward to thebridal dinner.
I see a woman may be madea fool
if she had not a spirit toresist.
They shall go forward,Kate, at thy command.
Obey the bride, you thatattend on her.
Go to the feast, revel,and domineer,
carouse full measure toher maidenhead,
be mad and merry, or gohang yourselves,
but for my bonny Kate, shemust with me.
Nay, look not big, norstamp, nor stare, nor fret.
I will be master of whatis mine own.
She is my goods, mychattels.
She is my house, myhousehold stuff,
my field, my barn,
my horse, my ox, my ass,my--oh--anything;
and here she stands.
Touch her whoever dare.
I'll bring mine action onthe proudest he
that stops my way inPadua.
Grumio, draw forth thyweapon.
We are beset with thieves!
Rescue thy mistress ifthou be a man.
Fear not, sweet wench, theyshall not touch thee, Kate.
I'll buckler thee againsta million.
Nay, let them go.
A couple of quiet ones.
Went--went they not quickly,I should die with laughing.
Of all mad matches, neverwas the like.
Mistress, what's youropinion of your sister?
Oh, that being mad herself,she's madly mated.
I warrant him, Petruchiois Kated.
Ho, neighbours andfriends,
though bride andbridegroom wants
for to supply the placesat the table,
you know there want nojunkets at the feast.
Lucentio, you shall supplythe bridegroom's place,
and let Bianca take hersister's room.
Shall sweet Biancapractise how to bride it?
She shall, Lucentio.
Gentlemen, let's go.
Fie, fie on all tiredjades, on all mad masters,
and all foul ways.
Was ever a man so beaten?
Was ever man so rayed?
Was ever man so weary?
I am sent before to make afire,
and they are coming afterto warm them,
but I, with blowing thefire, shall warm myself,
for considering theweather,
a taller man than I willtake cold.
Holla.
Ho.
Curtis!
Who is that calls socoldly?
A piece of ice.
A fire, good Curtis.
Is my master and his wifecoming, Grumio?
Ay, Curtis, ay, andtherefore fire, fire.
Cast on no water.
Is she so hot a shrew asshe's reported?
She was, good Curtis,before this frost,
but wilt thou make a fire,
or shall I complain onthee to our mistress
for being slow in thy hotoffice?
I prithee, good Grumio, tellme, how goes the world?
A cold world, Curtis, inevery office but thine,
and therefore, fire.
Do thy duty, and have thyduty,
for my master and mistressare almost frozen to death.
There's fire ready.
Therefore, good Grumio,the news.
Why, "Jack, boy; ho, boy,"and as much news as I wilt.
Come, you are so full ofcony-catching.
And therefore fire, for Ihave caught extreme cold.
Where's the cook?
Is supper ready, the housetrimmed,
rushes strewed, cobwebsswept?
Carpets laid, andeverything in order?
All ready.
Therefore, good Grumio, Ipray thee, the news.
First, know my horse istired,
my master and mistressfallen out.
How?
Out of their saddles intothe dirt.
Thereby hangs a tale.
Let's hear it, goodGrumio.
Lend thine ear.
Here.
There.
This is to feel a tale,not to hear a tale.
And therefore 'tis calleda sensible tale,
and this cuff was but toknock at your ear
and beseech it listening.
Now I begin.
Imprimis, we came down afoul hill,
my master riding behind mymistress--
Both of one horse?
What's that to thee?
Why, a horse.
Tell thou the tale, buthadst thou not crossed me,
thou shouldst have heardhow her horse fell,
and she under her horse.
Thou shouldst have heardin how miry a place,
how she was bemoiled,
how he left her with thehorse upon her,
how he beat me because herhorse stumbled,
how she waded through thedirt to pluck him off me,
how he swore, how she prayedthat never prayed before,
how I cried, how thehorses ran away,
how her bridle was burst,
how I lost my crupper withmany things of worthy memory
which now shall die inoblivion
and thou returnunexperienced to the grave.
By this reckoning, he ismore shrew than she.
Ay, and that thou and theproudest of you all
shall find when he comeshome,
but what talk I of this?
Call forth Nathaniel,Joseph, Nicholas, Philip,
Walter, Sugarsop, and therest.
Are they ready?
They are.
Call them forth.
Do you hear, ho?
You must meet my master tocountenance my mistress.
She has a face of her own.
Who knows not that?
Thou, it seems, that calls forcompany to countenance her.
I call them forth tocredit her.
She comes to borrownothing of them.
Welcome home, Grumio.
How now, Grumio.
What, Grumio.
How now, old lad?
Welcome, you--how now, you--what, you--fellow, you--
and thus much forgreeting.
Now, my spruce companions,
is all ready and allthings neat?
All things is ready.
How near is our master?
E'en at hand, andtherefore be not--
cock's passion, silence!
I hear my master.
What, no man at door tohold my stirrup nor totake my horse?
- Where is Nathaniel? -Here, sir.
- Gregory? - Here, sir.
- Philip? - Here, sir.
Here, sir; here, sir;here, sir; here, sir!
You logger-headed andunpolish'd grooms.
What, no attendance?
No regard?
No duty?
Where is the foolish knaveI sent before?
Here, sir, as foolish as Iwas before.
You peasant swain, youwhoreson malt-horse drudge!
Did I not bid thee meet mein the park
and bring along theserascal knaves with thee?
Nathaniel's coat, sir, wasnot fully made.
Gabriel's pumps were allunpink'd i' the heel,
and there was no link tocolour Peter's hat,
and Walter's dagger wasnot come from sheathing.
There was none fine butAdam, Ralph, and Gregory.
The rest were ragged, old, andbeggarly, yet as they are,
here are they come to meetyou, sir!
Shh!
Go, rascals, go, and fetchmy supper in.
Where is the life thatlate I led--
Where are those--
Sit down, Kate, andwelcome.
Food!
Food, food, food!
Why, when, I say?
Er-bock, bock, bock, bock.
Er-bock, bock, bock.
Bock, bock, bock.
Nay, good sweet Kate, bemerry.
Off with my boots, yourogues!
You villains, when?
It was the friar of ordersgray,
an he forth walked on hisway.
Ouch, you rogue,
you pluck my foot awry.
Take that, and mend theplucking off the other.
Be merry, Kate.
Some water, here; what,ho.
Where's my spanielTroilus?
Sirrah, get you hence,
and bid my cousinFerdinand come hither--
one, Kate, that you mustkiss and be acquainted with.
Where are my slippers?
Shall I have some water?
Ugh.
Come, Kate, and wash andwelcome heart--oh!
Whoreson villain!
Will you let it fall?
Patience, I pray you.
'Twas a fault unwilling.
A whoreson beetle-headed,flap-ear'd knave.
Come, Kate, sit down.
I know you have a stomach.
Will you give thanks,sweet Kate?
Or else shall I?
What's this?
Mutton?
Ay.
Who brought it?
I.
'Tis burnt--
Ah, ah!
And so is all the meat.
What dogs are these?
Where is the rascal cook?
How durst you, villains,bring it from the dresser,
and serve it thus to methat love it not?
Theretake it to you,trenchers, cups, and all...
you heedless joltheads andunmanner'd slaves.
Do you grumble?
I'll be with you straight.
I pray you, husband, benot so disquiet.
The meat was well if youwere so contented.
I tell thee, Kate, 'twasburnt!
Ah, ha, hoo, hoo!
Shh!
And dried away, and I expresslyam forbid to touch it,
for it engenders choler,planteth anger,
and better 'twere thatboth of us did fast--
since, of ourselves,ourselves are choleric--
than feed it with suchover-roasted flesh.
Uck.
Be patient.
Tomorrow 't shall bemended,
and for this night, we'llfast for company.
Yeeearghhh!
Come, I will bring thee tothy bridal chamber.
Didst ever see the like?
He kills her in her ownhumor.
Where is he?
In her chamber, making asermon of continency to her
and rails and swears andrates that she, poor soul,
knows not which way tostand, to look, to speak,
and sits as one new-risenfrom a dream.
Away, away, for he iscoming hither.
Thus have I politiclybegun my reign...
and 'tis my hope to endsuccessfully.
My falcon now is sharp andpassing empty...
until she stoop, she mustnot be full-gorged,
for then she never looksupon her lure.
Another way I have to manmy haggard,
to make her come and knowher keeper's call--
that is, to watch her aswe watch these kites
that bate and beat andwill not be obedient.
She eat no meat today nornone shall eat.
Last night, she slept notnor tonight she shall not.
As with the meat,
some undeserved fault I'll findabout the making of the bed,
and here I'll fling thepillow, there the bolster,
this way the coverlet,another way the sheets.
Ay, and amid this hurly, Iintend that all is done
in reverend care of her,
and in conclusion, sheshall watch all night,
and if she chance to nod,I'll rail and brawl
and with the clamor keepher still awake.
This is a way to kill awife with kindness,
and thus, I'll curb hermad and headstrong humor.
He that knows better howto tame a shrew,
now let him speak.
'Tis charity to show.
Is't possible, friendLicio, that Mistress Bianca
doth fancy any other butLucentio?
I tell you, sir, she bearsme fair in hand.
Sir, to satisfy you inwhat I said,
stand by and mark themanner of his teaching.
Now, mistress, profit youin what you read?
What, sir, read you?
First resolve me that.
I read that I profess, theArt to Love.
And may you prove, sir,master of your art.
While you, sweet dear,prove mistress of my heart.
Quick proceeders, marry.
Now, tell me, I pray,
you that durst swear atyour mistress Bianca
loved none in the world sowell as Lucentio.
Despiteful love,unconstant womankind.
I tell thee, Licio, thisis wonderful.
Mistake no more.
I am not Licio nor amusician as I seem to be
but one that scorn to livein this disguise
for such a one as leaves agentleman
and makes a god of such acullion.
Know, sir, that I amcall'd Hortensio.
Signior Hortensio, I haveoften heard
of your entire affectionto Bianca,
and since mine eyes arewitness of her lightness,
I will with you if you beso contented
forswear Bianca and herlove forever.
O, see how they kiss andcourt.
Signior Lucentio, here ismy hand,
and here I firmly vow
never to woo her no morebut do forswear her
as one unworthy all theformer favors
that I have fondlyflatter'd her withal.
And here I take theunfeigned oath
never to marry with herthough she would entreat.
Fie on her.
O, see how beastly shedoth court him.
O, would all the world buthe had quite forsworn.
For me, that I may surelykeep my vow,
I will be married to awealthy widow
ere three days pass thathath as long loved me
as I have loved this prouddisdainful haggard.
And so farewell, SigniorLucentio.
Kindness in women, nottheir beauteous looks,
shall win my love,
and so I take my leave inresolution as I swore before.
Resolution-- resolution--
Mistress Bianca, bless youwith such grace
as 'longeth to a lover'sblessed case.
Nay, I have ta'en younapping, gentle love,
and have forsworn you withHortensio.
Tranio, you jest.
What, have you bothforsworn me?
Mistress, we have.
Then we are rid of Licio.
I' faith, he'll have alusty widow now
that shall be wooed andwedded in a day.
God give him joy.
Ay, and he'll tame her.
He says so, Tranio.
Faith, he is gone unto thetaming school.
The taming school?
Is there such a place?
Ay, mistress, andPetruchio is the master
that teacheth tricks 11and 20 long
to tame a shrew and charmher chattering tongue.
Master, master, I havewatch'd so long
that I am dog-weary, ain'I?
But at last I spied
an ancient angel coming downthe hill will serve a turn.
What is he, Biondello?
Master, a mercatante or apedant, I know not what,
but formal in apparel, ingait, and countenance
surely like a father.
What of him, Tranio?
If he be credulous andtrust my tale,
I'll make him glad to seemVincentio
and give assurance toBaptista Minola
as if he were the rightVincentio.
Take in your love, andthen let me alone.
Look, Tranio.
God save you, sir.
Ah, and you, sir.
You are welcome.
Travel you far on?
Or are you at thefarthest?
Sir, at the farthest for aweek or two,
but then up farther, andas far as Rome,
and so to Tripoli if Godlend me life.
What countryman, I pray?
Ah, of Mantua.
Mantua, sir?
Marry, God forbid.
And come to Padua carelessof your life?
My life, sir?
How, I pray? For that goeshard.
Ha, ha, ha.
'Tis death for anyone inMantua to come to Padua.
Oh.
Know you not the cause?
Oh, ah, ah--
Your ships are stay'd atVenice, and the duke,
for private quarrel 'twixtyour duke and him,
hath publish'd andproclaim'd it openly.
'Tis, marvel, but that youare but newly come,
you might have heard itelse proclaim'd about.
Alas, sir, it is worse forme than so,
for I have bills for moneyby exchange
from Florence and musthere deliver them.
Well, sir, to do youcourtesy,
this will I do, and this Iwill advise you--
First, tell me, have youever been at Pisa?
Ay, sir, in Pisa have Ioften been,
Pisa renowned for gravecitizens.
Oh, yes, yes, yes.
Among them know you oneVincentio?
I know him not, but I haveheard of him,
a merchant of incomparablewealth.
He is my father, sir, andsooth to say
in countenance somewhatdoth resemble you.
As much as an apple dothan oyster and all one.
To save your life in thisextremity,
This favor will I do youfor his sake,
and think it not the worstof all your fortunes
that you are like to SirVincentio.
His name and credit shallyou undertake,
and in my house, you shallbe friendly lodged.
Look that you take uponyou as you should.
You understand me, sir?
Ah, ah, well--
So shall you stay
till you have done yourbusiness in the city.
If this be courtesy, sir,accept of it.
O sir, I do and willrepute you ever
the patron of my life andliberty.
Then go with me to makethe matter good.
This, by the way, I letyou understand:
my father is here look'dfor every day
to pass assurance of adower in marriage
'twixt me and oneBaptista's daughter here.
In all these circumstances,I'll instruct you.
Go with me to clothe youas becomes you.
Yeah, yeah, well-- ha, ha,ha, ha.
Come away.
Oh.
No, no, I dare not for mylife.
The more my wrong, themore his spite appears.
What, did he marry me tofamish me?
Beggars that come unto myfather's door
upon entreaty have apresent alms.
If not, elsewhere, theymeet with charity,
but I, who never knew howto entreat
nor never needed that Ishould entreat,
am starved for meat, giddyfor lack of sleep,
with oaths kept waking,and with brawling fed,
and that which spites memore than all these wrongs,
he does it under name ofperfect love
as who should say if Ishould sleep or eat
'twere deadly sickness orelse present death.
Oh.
I prithee, go, and get mesome repast.
I care not what so it bewholesome food.
What say you to a neat'sfoot?
'Tis passing good.
I prithee, let me have it.
I fear it is too cholerica meat.
How say you to a fat tripefinely broil'd?
I like it well.
Good Grumio, fetch it me.
I cannot tell.
I fear it is choleric.
What say you to a piece ofbeef and mustard?
A dish that I do love tofeed upon.
Ay, but the mustard is toohot a little.
Why then, the beef, andlet the mustard rest.
Ah, now, that you shallnot.
You shall have themustard, or you get nobeef of Grumio.
Then both, or one, oranything thou wilt.
Why then, the mustardwithout the beef.
Go, get thee gone, thoufalse, deluding slave,
that feed'st me with thevery name of meat!
Sorrow on thee and all thepack of you
that triumph thus upon mymisery!
Go, get thee gone, I say!
How fares my Kate?
What, sweeting, all amort?
Mistress, what cheer?
Faith, as cold as can be.
Pluck up thy spirits.
Look cheerfully upon me.
Here, love, thou see'sthow diligent I am
to dress thy meat myselfand bring it thee?
I am sure, sweet Kate, thiskindness merits thanks.
What, not a word?
Nay, then thou lovest itnot,
and all my pains is sortedto no proof.
Here, take away this dish.
I pray you, let it stand.
The poorest service isrepaid with thanks,
and so shall mine, beforeyou touch the meat.
I thank you, sir.
Signior Petruchio, fie.
You are to blame.
Come, mistress Kate, I'llbear you company.
Eat it up all, Hortensio,if thou lovest me.
Much good do it unto thygentle heart.
Kate, eat apace, and now,my honey love,
will we return unto thyfather's house
and revel it as bravely asthe best
with silken coats and capsand golden rings
and ruffs and cuffs andfardingales and things
and scarfs and fans anddouble change of bravery
and amber bracelets, beads,and all this knavery.
What?
Hast thou dined?
The tailor stays thyleisure
to deck thy body with hisruffling treasure.
Come, tailor, let us seethese ornaments.
Lay forth the gown.
Ah, what news with you,sir?
Here is the cap yourworship did bespeak.
Why, this was molded on aporringer,
a velvet dish.
Tsk, tsk.
'Tis lewd and filthy.
Why, 'tis a walnut or acockleshell,
a knack, a toy, a trick, ababy's cap.
Away with it.
Come, let me have abigger.
I'll have no bigger.
This doth fit the time,
and gentlewomen wear suchcaps as these.
When you are gentle, youshall have one too
and not till then, hmm?
That will not be in haste.
Why, sir, I trust I mayhave leave to speak,
and speak I will!
I am no child, no babe!
Your betters have enduredme say my mind,
and if you cannot, bestyou stop your ears.
My tongue will tell theanger of my heart,
or else my heartconcealing it will break,
and rather than it shall,
I will be free even to theuttermost
as I please in words!
Why, thou say'st true!
It is a paltry cap,
a custard coffin, abauble, a silken pie.
I love thee well in thatthou likest it not.
Love me or love me not, Ilike the cap,
and it I will have, or Iwill have none!
Thy gown?
Why, ay.
Come, tailor, let ussee't.
Oh.
O mercy, God.
What masquing stuff ishere?
What's this?
A sleeve?
'Tis like a demi-cannon.
What, up and down, carvedlike an apple tart?
Here's snip and nip andcut and stitch and slash
like to a censer in abarber's shop.
Why, what, i' devil's name,tailor, call'st thou this?
I see she's like to haveneither cap nor gown.
You bid me make it orderlyand well
according to the fashionand the time.
Marry, and did, but if yoube remember'd,
I did not bid you mar itto the time.
Go, hop me over everykennel home,
for you shall hop withoutmy custom, sir.
I'll none of it.
Hence, make your best ofit.
I never saw abetter-fashion'd gown,
more quaint, more pleasing,nor more commendable.
Belike you mean to make apuppet of me.
Why, true, he means tomake a puppet of thee.
She says your worship meansto make a puppet of her.
Monstrous arrogance.
Thou liest, thou thread,thou thimble,
thou yard, three-quarters,half-yard, quarter, nail,
flea, thou nit, thouwinter cricket, thou.
Braved in my own housewith a skein of thread?
Away, thou rag, thouquantity, thou remnant,
or I shall so be-mete theewith thy yard
as thou shalt think onprating whilst thou livest.
I tell thee, I, that thouhast marr'd her gown.
Your worship is deceived.
The gown is made just asmy master made direction.
Grumio gave order how itshould be done.
I gave him no order. Igave him the stuff.
But how did you desire itshould be made?
Marry, sir, with needleand thread.
But did you not request tohave it cut?
Thou hast faced manythings. Face not me.
Thou hast braved many men.Brave not me.
I will neither be facednor braved.
I say unto thee, I bid thymaster cut out the gown,
but I did not bid him cutit to pieces.
Ergo, thou liest.
Why, here is the note ofthe fashion to testify.
Read it.
The note lies in's throat,if he say I said so.
"Imprimis, a loose-bodiedgown"--
Master, if ever I saidloose-bodied gown,
sew me in the skirts ofit,
and beat me to death witha bottom of brown bread.
I said a gown.
Proceed.
- "with a small-compassedcape"-- - I confess the cape.
- "with a trunk sleeve"--- I confess two sleeves.
"the sleeves curiouslycut."
Ay, there's the villainy.
Error i' the bill, sir.
I commanded the sleevesshould be cut out and sewnup again,
and that, I'll prove uponthee
though thy little fingerbe armed in a thimble.
This is true that I say,
an I had thee in place wherethou shouldst know it.
Take thou the bill, giveme thy mete-yard, andspare not me.
God-a-mercy, Grumio, thenshall he have no odds.
Well, sir, in brief, thegown is not for me.
You are i' the right, sir.
It is for my mistress.
Go, take it up unto thymaster's use.
Villain, not for thy life.
Take up my mistress' gownfor thy master's use.
Why, sir, what's yourconceit in that?
O, sir, the conceit isdeeper than you think for.
Take up my mistress' gownto his master's use.
Ha, ha, ha.
Hortensio...
say thou wilt see thetailor paid.
Go take it hence, begone,and say no more!
Tailor, I'll pay thee forthy gown tomorrow.
Take no unkindness of hishasty words.
Ah, ah, ah--
Away, I say.
Um, uh--
Commend me to thy master.
Well, come, my Kate.
We will unto your father's
even in these honest, meanhabiliments.
Our purses shall be proud,our garments poor...
for 'tis the mind thatmakes the body rich.
As the sun breaks throughthe darkest clouds,
so honour peereth in themeanest habit.
What, is the jay moreprecious than the lark
because his fathers aremore beautiful?
Or is the adder betterthan the eel
because his painted skincontents the eye?
O, no, good Kate, neitherart thou the worse
for this poor furnitureand mean array.
If thou account'st itshame, lay it on me,
and therefore, frolic.
We will hence forthwith
to feast and sport us atthy father's house.
Go, call my men, and letus straight to him,
and bring our horses untoLong-lane end.
There will we mount, andthither walk on foot.
Let's see; I think 'tisnow some seven o'clock,
and well we may come thereby dinnertime.
I dare assure you, sir,'tis almost two.
It 'twill be supper timeere you come there.
It shall be seven ere I goto horse.
Look, what I speak or door think to do,
you are still crossing it.
Sirs, let't alone.
I will not go today, andere I do,
it shall be what o'clock Isay it is.
Sir, this is the house.
Please it you that I call?
Ay, sir, what else?
And but I be deceived,
Signior Baptista mayremember me, near 20 yearsago in Genoa
where we were lodger satthe Pegasus.
'Tis well, and hold yourown in any case
with such austerity as'longeth to a father.
I warrant you.
But, sir, here comes yourboy.
'Twere good he wereschool'd.
Fear you not him.
Sirrah Biondello,
now do your dutythroughly, I advise you.
Imagine 'twere the rightVincentio.
Tut, fear not me.
But hast thou done thyerrand to Baptista?
I told him that yourfather was at Venice
and that you look'd forhim this day in Padua.
Thou'rt a tall fellow.
Hold thee that to drink.
Here comes Baptista.
Set your countenance, sir.
Signior Baptista, you arehappily met.
Sir, this is the gentlemanI told you of.
I pray you, stand goodfather to me now.
Give me Bianca for mypatrimony.
Soft son.
Sir, by your leave,
uh, ah, having come to Paduato gather in some debts,
my son Lucentio made meacquainted
with a weighty cause oflove between your daughterand himself,
and for the good report Ihear of you
and for the love hebeareth to your daughter--
and she to him--
to stay him not too long,
I am content in a goodfather's care,
to have him match'd,
and if you please to likeno worse than I,
upon some agreement, me shallyou find ready and willing
with one consent to haveher so bestow'd,
for curious I cannot bewith you,
Signior Baptista, of whomI hear so well.
Sir, pardon me in what Ihave to say.
Your plainness and yourshortness please me well.
Right true it is,
your son Lucentio heredoth love my daughter
and she loveth him,
or both dissemble deeplytheir affections--
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.
And therefore, if you sayno more than this,
that like a father youwill deal with him
and pass my daughter asufficient dower,
the match is made, and allis done.
Your son shall have mydaughter with consent.
Ah, well--
I thank you, sir.
Where then do you knowbest
we be affied and suchassurance ta'en
as shall with eitherpart's agreement stand?
Not in my house, Lucentio,for, you know,
pitchers have ears, and Ihave many servants.
Besides, old Gremio ishearkening still,
and happily, we might beinterrupted.
Then at my lodging,
an it like you, there dothmy father lie,
and there, this night,
we'll pass the businessprivately and well.
Send for your daughter byyour servant here.
My boy shall fetch thescrivener presently.
Ay.
The worst is this, that atso slender warning,
you are like to have athin and slender pittance.
It likes me well.
Cambio, get you home,
and bid Bianca make herready straight,
and if you will, tell whathath happened.
Lucentio's father isarrived in Padua
and how she's like to beLucentio's wife.
I pray the gods she maywith all my heart.
Dally not with the gods,but get thee gone.
Signior Baptista, shall Ilead the way?
Welcome.
One mess is like to beyour cheer.
Come, sir, we will betterit in Pisa.
I'll follow you.
Cambio.
What sayest thou,Biondello?
You saw my master wink andlaugh upon you?
Biondello, what of that?
Faith, nothing but hasleft me here behind
to expound the meaning ormoral of his signs and tokens.
I pray thee, moralizethem.
Then thus.
Baptista is safe,
talking with the deceivingfather of a deceitful son.
And what of him?
His daughter is to be broughtby you to the supper.
And then?
The old priest of SaintLuke's church
is at your command at allhours.
And what of all this?
I cannot tell,
expect they are busied abouta counterfeit assurance.
Take you assurance ofher--
"Cum privilegio adimprimendum solum"--in't, eh?
To the church, take thepriest, clerk, and somesufficient honest witnesses.
Now, if this be not thatyou look for, I have nomore to say,
but bid Bianca farewellforever and a day.
Hearest thou, Biondello?
I cannot tarry.
I knew a wench married inan afternoon
as she went to the garden forparsley to stuff a rabbit,
and so may you, sir, andso, adieu, sir.
My master hath appointedme to go to Saint Luke's,
to bid the priest be readyto come against
you come with yourappendix.
I may, and will if she beso contented.
She will be pleased.
Then wherefore should Idoubt?
Hap what hap may, I'llroundly go about her.
It shall go hard if Cambiogo without her.
Come on, i' God's name, oncemore toward our father's.
Good Lord, how bright andgoodly shines the moon.
"The moon"--the sun: it isnot moonlight now.
I say it is the moon thatshines so bright.
I know it is the sun thatshines so bright.
By my mother's son, andthat's myself,
it shall be moon or staror what I list,
or ere I journey to yourfather's house.
Go on, and fetch ourhorses back again.
Evermore cross'd and cross'd,nothing but cross'd.
Say as he says, or weshall never go.
Forward, I pray, since wehave come so far,
and be it moon or sun orwhat you please,
an if you please to callit a rush-candle,
henceforth I vow it shallbe so for me.
I say it is the moon.
I know it is the moon.
Nay, then you lie.
It is the blessed sun.
Then, God be bless'd, itis the blessed sun,
but sun it is not if yousay it is not,
and the moon changes evenas your mind.
What you will have itnamed, even that it is,
and so it shall be so forKatharine.
Petruchio, go thy ways.
The field is won.
Well, forward, forward.
Thus the bowl should run
and not unluckily againstthe bias.
But, soft.
Company is coming here.
Good morrow, gentlemistress.
Where away?
Tell me, sweet Kate, andtell me truly too,
hast thou beheld a freshergentlewoman
such war of white and redwithin her cheeks?
What stars do spangleheaven with such beauty
as those two eyes becomethat heavenly face?
Fair lovely maid, oncemore good day to thee.
Sweet Kate, embrace herfor her beauty's sake.
A' will make the man madto make a woman of him.
Young, budding virgin,fair and fresh and sweet,
whither away, or where isthy abode?
Happy the parents of sofair a child,
happier the man whomfavorable stars
allots thee for his lovelybedfellow.
Why, how now, Kate.
I hope thou art not mad.
This is a man...
old, wrinkled, faded,wither'd,
and not a maiden as thousay'st he is.
Pardon, old father, mymistaking eyes
that have been sobedazzled with the sun
that everything I look onseemeth green.
Now I perceive thou art areverend father.
Pardon, I pray thee, formy mad mistaking.
Do, good old grandsire,
and withal make knownwhich way thou travellest.
If along with us, we shallbe joyful of thy company.
Fair sir, and you my merrymistress,
that with your strangeencounter much amazed me,
my name is call'd Vincentio,my dwelling Pisa,
and bound I am to Padua,
there to visit a son of minewhich long I have not seen.
What is his name?
Lucentio, gentle sir.
Happily met, the happierfor thy son.
And now by law as well asreverend age,
I may entitle thee myloving father.
The sister to my wife,this gentlewoman,
thy son by this hathmarried.
Wonder not nor be notgrieved.
She is of good esteem,
her dowry wealthy, and ofworthy birth.
Beside, so qualified asmay beseem
the spouse of any noblegentleman.
Let me embrace with oldVincentio,
and wander we to see thyhonest son
who will of thy arrival befull joyous.
But is this true?
Or is it else yourpleasure, like pleasanttravellers,
to break a jest upon thecompany you overtake?
I do assure thee, father,so it is.
Come, go along, and seethe truth hereof,
for our first merrimenthath made thee jealous.
Well, Petruchio, this hasput me in heart.
Have to my widow, and ifshe be froward,
now hast thou taughtHortensio to be untoward.
I marvel Cambio comes notall this while.
Sir, here's the door.
This is Lucentio's house.
My father's lies moretoward the marketplace.
Thither must I, and here Ileave you, sir.
You shall not choose butdrink before you go.
I think I shall commandyour welcome here,
and by all likelihood,some cheer is toward.
They're busy within.
You were best knocklouder.
What's he that knocks as hewould beat down the gate?
Is Signior Lucentiowithin, sir?
He's within, sir, but notto be spoken withal.
What if a man bring him ahundred pound or two
to make merry withal?
You can keep your hundredpounds to yourself.
He shall need none so longas I live.
Nay, I told you your sonwas well-beloved in Padua.
Do you hear, sir?
To leave frivolouscircumstances, I pray you,
tell Signior Lucentio thathis father
is come from Pisa and is hereat the door to speak with him.
Thou liest.
His father is come fromPadua
and here looking out atthe window.
Art thou his father?
Ay, sir, so his mothersays if I may believe her.
Why, how now, gentleman.
Why, this is flat knaveryto take upon you anotherman's name.
Lay hands on the villain.
I believe a' means to cozensomebody in this city
under my countenance.
I have seen them in thechurch together.
God send 'em goodshipping.
Ah!
Ay that; who's here?
Mine old master Vincentio.
Now we are undone andbrought to nothing.
Come hither, crack-hemp.
Hope I may choose, sir.
Come hither, you rogue.
What, have you forgot me?
Forgot you?
Oh, no, sir, I could notforget you, sir.
I never saw you before inall my life.
What, you notoriousvillain,
didst thou never see thymaster's father, Vincentio?
What, my old worshipfulold master?
Oh, marry, sir, yes.
See where he looks out ofthe window.
Is't so, indeed.
Help, help, help!
Here's a madman willmurder me.
Help, son. Help, SigniorBaptista!
Prithee, Kate, let's standaside
and see the end of thiscontroversy.
Sir, what are you thatoffer to beat my servant?
Ah!
What am I, sir?
Nay, what are you, sir?
O immortal gods, O finevillain,
a silken doublet, a velvethose, a scarlet cloak,
and a copatain hat.
O, I am undone. I amundone.
While I play the goodhusband at home,
my son and my servant spendall at the university.
How now, what's thematter?
Why, is the man lunatic?
Sir, you seem a sober ancientgentleman by your habit,
but your words show you amadman.
Why, sir, what 'cerns it youif I wear pearl and gold?
I thank my good father Iam able to maintain it.
Thy father?
O villain, he is a sailmaker in Bergamo.
You mistake, sir.
Pray, what do you think ishis name?
His name? As if I knew nothis name.
I have brought him up eversince he was three years old,
and his name is Tranio.
Away, away, mad ass!
His name is Lucentio.
He is mine only son
and heir to the lands ofme, Signior Vincentio.
Lucentio.
O, he hath murdered hismaster.
Lay hold on him, I chargeyou, in the duke's name.
O, my son, my son.
Tell me, thou villain,where is my son Lucentio?
Call forth an officer.
Carry this mad knave tothe jail.
Father Baptista, I chargeyou, see he be forthcoming.
Carry me to the jail?
Stay, officer, he shallnot go to prison.
Talk not, Signior Gremio.
I say he shall go toprison.
Take heed, SigniorBaptista,
lest you be cony-catchedin this business.
I dare swear this is theright Vincentio.
Swear, if thou darest,hmm?
Nay, I dare not swear it.
Then thou wert best saythat I am not Lucentio.
Yes, I know thee to beSignior Lucentio.
Away with the dotard.
To the jail with him.
Thus strangers may behailed and abused!
O monstrous villain!
O, we are spoiled, andyonder, he is.
Deny him, forswear him, orelse we are all undone.
Pardon, sweet father.
Lives my sweet son?
Pardon, dear father.
How hast thou offended?
Where is Lucentio?
Here's Lucentio,
right son to the rightVincentio
that have by marriage madethy daughter mine
while counterfeit supposesbleared thine eyne.
Here's packing,
with a witness to deceiveus all.
Where is that damnedvillain Tranio
that faced and braved mein this matter so?
Why, tell me, is this notmy Cambio?
Cambio has changed intoLucentio.
Love wrought thesemiracles.
Bianca's love made meexchange my state with Tranio
while he did bear mycountenance in the town,
and happily, I havearrived at the last
unto the wished haven ofmy bliss.
But, I--
What Tranio did, myselfenforced him to.
Then pardon him, sweetfather, for my sake.
I'll slit the villain'snose
that would have sent me tothe jail.
But do you hear, sir?
Have you married mydaughter without asking mygood will?
Fear not, Baptista, wewill content you, go to,
but I will in to berevenged for this villainy.
And I, to sound the depthof this knavery.
Look not pale, Bianca.
Thy father will not frown.
My cake is dough,
but I'll in among the rest
out of hope of all but myshare of the feast.
Husband, let's follow tosee the end of this ado.
First, kiss me, Kate, andwe will.
What, here?
In the midst of thestreet?
What, art thou ashamed ofme?
No, sir, God forbid, butashamed to kiss.
Why, then, let's homeagain.
Come, sirrah, let's away.
Nay, I will give thee akiss.
Now, pray thee, love,stay.
Is this not well?
Come, my sweet Kate.
Better once than never,for never too late.
At last, though long, ourjarring notes agree,
and time it is when ragingwar is done
to smile at scapes andperils overblown.
My fair Bianca, bid myfather welcome
while I with self-samekindness welcome thine.
Brother Petruchio, sisterKatharina,
and thou, Hortensio, withthy loving widow,
feast with the best, andwelcome to my house.
Now, then--
Pray you, sit down,
for now we sit to chat aswell as eat.
Nothing but sit and sitand eat and eat.
Padua affords thiskindness, son Petruchio.
Padua affords nothing butwhat is kind.
Here, here. Here, here.
For both our sakes, Iwould that word were true.
Now, for my life,Hortensio fears his widow.
Never trust me if I beafeard.
You are very sensible, andyet, you miss my sense.
I mean, Hortensio isafeard of you.
He that is giddy thinksthe world turns round.
Roundly replied.
Mistress, how mean youthat?
Thus I conceive by him.
Conceives by me.
How likes Hortensio that?
My widow says, thus sheconceives her tale.
Very well mended.
Kiss him for that, goodwidow.
"He that is giddy thinksthe world turns round."
I pray you, tell me whatyou meant by that.
Your husband, beingtroubled with a shrew--
Ooh--
measures my husband'ssorrow by his woe,
and now you know mymeaning.
A very mean meaning.
Right, I mean you.
And I am mean indeed,respecting you.
To her, Kate.
To her, widow.
A hundred marks, my Katedoes put her down.
That's my office.
Spoke like an officer.
Ha' to thee, lad.
How likes Gremio thesequick-witted folks?
Believe me, sir, they butttogether well.
A head and butt-- anhasty-witted body
would say your head andbutt were head and horn.
Ay, mistress bride, haththat awaken'd you?
Ay, but not frighted me.
Therefore, I'll sleepagain.
Nay, that you shall not.
Since you have begun,
have at you for a bitterjest or two.
Am I your bird?
Then, I mean to shift mybush,
and then pursue me as youdraw your bow.
You are welcome, all.
She hath prevented me.
Here, Signior Tranio.
This bird you aim'd at,though you hit her not.
Therefore, a health to allthat shot and miss'd.
Shot and missed!
O, sir, Lucentio slipp'dme like his greyhound
which runs himself andcatches for his master.
A good swift simile, butsomething currish.
Oh!
'Tis well, sir, that youhunted for yourself.
'Tis thought your deerdoes hold you at a bay.
O ho, Petruchio.
I thank thee for thatgird, good Tranio.
Confess, confess, hath henot hit you here?
A' has a little gall'd me,I confess,
and as the jest did glanceaway from me,
'tis ten to one it maim'dyou two outright.
Now, in good sadness, sonPetruchio,
I think thou hast theveriest shrew of all.
Well, I say no, andtherefore, for assurance,
let's each one send untohis wife,
and he whose wife is mostobedient
to come at first when hedoth send for her
shall win the wager whichwe will propose.
Content. What is thewager?
20 crowns.
20 crowns?
I'll venture so much of myhawk or hound
but 20 times so much uponmy wife.
A hundred then.
Content.
A match; 'tis done.
Who shall begin?
That will I.
Go, Biondello, bid yourmistress come to me.
I go.
Son, I'll be your half,Bianca comes.
I'll have no halves.
I'll bear it all myself.
How now, what news?
Sir, my mistress sends youword
that she is busy, and shecannot come.
How, she is busy, and shecannot come.
I-Is that an answer?
Ay, and a kind one too.
Pray God, sir, your wifesend you not a worse.
I hope better.
Sirrah Biondello, go andentreat my wife
to come to me forthwith.
O, ho, entreat her.
Nay, then she must needscome.
Sir, I am afraid,
do what you can, yourswill not be entreated.
Now, where's my wife?
Ah, she says you have somegoodly jest in hand.
She will not come.
She bids you come to her.
Whoa!
Worse and worse; she willnot come.
O vile, intolerable, notto be endured.
Sirrah Grumio,
go to your mistress.
Say I command her come tome.
I know her answer.
What?
She will not.
The fouler fortune mine,and there an end.
Now, by my holidame, herecomes Katharina.
What is your will, sir,that you send for me?
Where is your sister andHortensio's wife?
They sit conferring by theparlor fire.
Go fetch them hither.
If they deny to come,
swinge me them soundlyforth unto their husbands.
Away, I say, and bringthem hither straight.
Here is a wonder, if youtalk of a wonder.
And so it is.
I wonder what it bodes.
Marry,
peace it bodes
and love and quiet life
and awful rule and rightsupremacy
and, to be short, what notthat's sweet and happy?
Now, fair befall thee,good Petruchio,
the wager thou hast won,
and I will add unto theirlosses 20,000 crowns,
another dowry to anotherdaughter,
for she is changed as shehas never been.
Nay, I will win my wagerbetter yet
and show more sign of herobedience,
her new-built virtue andobedience.
See where she comes andbrings your froward wives
as prisoners to herwomanly persuasion.
Katharine...
that cap of yours becomesyou not.
Off with that bauble.
Throw it underfoot.
Lord, let me never have acause to sigh
till I be brought to sucha silly pass.
Fie, what foolish dutycall you this?
I would your duty were asfoolish too.
The wisdom of your duty,fair Bianca,
hath cost me an hundredcrowns since supper time.
The more fool you forlaying on my duty.
Katharine, I charge thee,tell these headstrong women
what duty they do owetheir lords and husbands.
Come, come, you'remocking.
We will have no telling.
Come on, I say, and firstbegin with her.
She shall not.
I say she shall!
Ooh!
And first, begin with her.
Fie, fie.
Unknit that threatening,unkind brow,
and dart not scornfulglances from those eyes
to wound thy lord, thyking, thy governor.
It blots thy beauty asfrosts do bite the meads,
confounds thy fame aswhirlwinds shake fair buds,
and in no sense is meet oramiable.
A woman moved is like afountain troubled--
muddy, ill-seeming, thick,bereft of beauty--
and while it is so, noneso dry or thirsty
will deign to sip or touchone drop of it.
Thy husband is thy lord,thy life, thy keeper,
thy head, thy sovereign,one that cares for thee,
and for thy maintenancecommits his body
to painful labor both bysea and land
to watch the night instorms, the day in cold,
whilst thou liest warm athome, secure and safe,
that craves no othertribute from thy hands
but love, fair looks, andtrue obedience--
too little payment for sogreat a debt.
Such duty as the subjectowes the prince
even such a woman oweth toher husband,
and when she's froward,peevish, sullen, sour,
and not obedient to hishonest will,
what is she but a foulcontending rebel
and graceless traitor toher loving lord?
I am ashamed that womenare so simple
to offer war where theyshould kneel for peace,
to seek for rule,supremacy, and sway
when they are bound toserve, love, and obey.
Why are our bodies softand weak and smooth,
unapt to toil and troublein the world
but that our softconditions and our hearts
should well agree with ourexternal parts?
Come, come, you frowardand unable worms.
My mind hath been as bigas one of yours,
my heart as great, myreason haply more,
to bandy word for word andfrown for frown,
but now I see our lancesare but straws,
our strength as weak, ourweakness past compare,
that seeming to be mostwhich we indeed least are.
Then vail your stomachs,for it is no boot,
and place your hands belowyour husband's foot.
In token of which duty, ifhe please,
my hand is ready.
May it do him ease.
Why, there's a wench.
Come on, and kiss me,Kate.
Well, go thy ways, oldlad, for thou shalt ha't.
'Tis a good hearing whenchildren are toward--
But a harsh hearing whenwomen are froward.
Come, Kate, we'll to bed.
We three are married, butyou two are sped.
Now, go thy ways.
Thou hast tamed a cursedshrew.
'Tis a wonder, by yourleave, she will be tamed so.
Hmmm.
How blessed is he thatfears the Lord
and walketh, walketh inhis ways.
Thy love, thy labor, thylove, thy labor,
thou shalt ever eat
and happy be always.
Thy wife shall as afruitful vine
by thy house sides, housesides be found.
Thy child, thy child,
thy children like theolive branches green
about thy table round.
Behold, the man that fearsthe Lord.
Most blessed, blessedshall he be.
The Lord, the Lord,
the Lord shall in satietygive
his blessing unto thee.
Thou shalt Jerusalem'sgood behold
whilst thou on earth dostdwell.
Thou shalt, thou shalt,thou shalt,
thou shalt thy children'schildren see
and peace on Israel.
The material on thisvideocassette is protectedby copyright.
It is for private useonly,
and any other useincluding copying,reproducing,
or performance in public,in whole or in part,
is prohibited by law.